good afternoon and proud to be here on
TEDx Krakov I'll try to speak a little
bit today about a phenomenon which can
and is actually changing the world and
whose name is people power I'll start
with the anecdote or for those of you
who are Monty Python lovers a Monty
Python type of sketch here it is it is
December 15 2010 somebody gives you a
bet you will look at the crystal ball
and you will see the future future will
be accurate but you need to share it to
the world
okay curiosity killed the cat you take
the bat you look at the crystal ball one
hour later you're sitting in a building
of the national TV in a top show and you
tell the story before the end of 2011
Ben Ali and Mubarak and Gaddafi would be
down and prosecuted Saleh of Yemen and
Assad of Syria would be ear challenged
or already on their knees all Simha bin
Laden would be dead and rot Kemal each
will be in heck no the anchor watches
you with a strange gaze on his face and
then on the top of it you had and
thousands of the young people from
Athens Madrid in New York will
demonstrate for social justice claiming
that they are inspired with Arabs next
thing you know two guys in white appear
they give you the strange t-shirt take
you to the nearest mental institution so
I would like to speak a little bit about
the phenomenon which is behind what
already seems to be the very bad year
for a bad guys and this phenomenon is
called people power
well people power has been there for a
while it helped Gandhi kick Brits from
India
it helped Martin Luther King wins
historic racial struggle it helped local
black Valenza to kick out 1 million
Soviet troops from Poland and beginning
the end of the Soviet Union as we know
it so what's new in it what seems to be
very new which is the idea I would like
to share with you today that there is a
set of rules and skills which can be
learned and taught in order to perform
successful nonviolent struggle if this
is true we can help this movement
well first one analytic skills
I'll try where it all started in the
Middle East and for so many years we
were living with completely the wrong
perception of the Middle East it was
looking like a frozen region literally
refrigerator and there are only two
types of meal they're steak which stands
for a Mubarak Benally type of military
police dictatorship or a potato which
stands for terror and type of talk
receipts and everybody was amazed when
the refrigerator opened and millions of
young mainly secular people step out to
do the change guess what
they didn't watch the demographics what
is the average age of Egyptian 24 how
long will work in power 31 so this
system just obsolete the expert and
young people of our world have awakened
one morning and understood that power
lies in their hand the rest is the year
in front of us and guess what the same
generation Epsilon with their rules with
their tools with their games and with
your language which sounds a little bit
strange to me I'm 38 now and can you
look at the age of the people the
streets of Europe seems that generation
epsilon is coming now let me set another
example I'm meeting different people
throughout the world and there are you
know academics and professors and
doctors and they will always store
conditions they'll say people power will
work only if regime is not too
oppressive they will say people power
will work if the annual income of the
countries between X and that they'll say
people power will work only there is a
foreign pressure they will say people
power will work only if there is no oil
and I mean there is a set of conditions
well the news here is that your skills
bring in the conflict seems to be more
important than the conditions namely
skills of unity planning and maintain
nonviolent discipline let me give you
the example I'm coming from country
called Serbia took us ten years to unite
18 opposition party leaders with their
big egos behind one single candidate
against Balkan dictator Slobodan
Milosevic guess what that
the day of his defeat you look at the
Egyptians day 5 on Tahrir Square they
get rid of their individual symbols they
appear on the street only with the flag
of Egypt
I will give you contra example you see 9
presidential candidates running against
Lukashenko you'll know the outcome so
unity is a big thing and this can be
achieved same with planning somebody
have lied to you about this successful
and spontaneous nonviolent revolution
that things doesn't exist in the world
whenever you see young people in front
of the road trying to fraternize with
the police or military somebody was
thinking about it before now at the end
nonviolent discipline and this is
probably the game changer if you
maintain nonviolent discipline you will
exclusively win you have 100 thousand
people in a non-violent March here one
ideot or Agent Provocateur throwing
stone guess what takes all the cameras
that one guy one single act of violence
can literally destroy your movement now
let me move to another place its
selection of strategies and tactics
there are certain rules in nonviolent
struggle you may follow first you start
small second you pick the bells you can
win it's only 200 of us in this room we
won't call for the March of million but
what if we organize spraying graffiti
throughout the night all over crack of
city the city will know so we pick the
tactics which accommodates to the event
especially this thing we call the small
tactics of dispersion they're very
useful in a violent oppression we are
actually witnessing the picture of one
of the best tactics ever used it was on
Tahrir Square where international
community was constantly frightened that
you know the Islamists will overtake the
revolution what they've organized
Christians protecting Muslims where they
were praying Coptic wedding cheered by
thousands of Muslims the world has just
changed the picture but somebody was
thinking about this previously so there
are so many things you can do instead of
get getting into one place shouting and
you know showing off in front of the
security forces now there is also
another very important dynamics and this
is dynamics normally analytics don't see
this is dynamics between fear and apathy
on one side and enthusiasm and humour on
another side so it works like in
videogame you have a fear hi
we have status quo you haven't to zsm
higher you see if you're starting
melting day 2 you see people running
towards police instant from the police
in Egypt you you can tell that some
tongue thing is happening there and then
it's about the humor humor is such a
powerful game-changer and of course it
was very big in Poland you know we were
just a small group of crazy students in
Serbia when we made this big skit we put
the big petrol barrel with a you know
portrait picture of mr. president on it
in the middle of the main stream there's
a hole on the top so you could literally
come put the coin in get a baseball bat
and hit his face sounds loud in within
the minutes we were sitting in a nearby
cafe having coffee and there was a clue
of people waiting to do this lovely
thing well that's just the beginning of
the show the real show starts when the
police appears what they will do arrest
us we are nowhere to be seen we're like
three blocks away observing it from our
you know espresso bar arrest the
shoppers with kids doesn't make sense of
course you could bet they've done the
most stupid thing they arrested the bar
and now the picture of the smashed face
on the barrel with the policeman
dragging them to the police car that was
the best day for the photographer's from
newspapers that they ever will have so I
mean this these are the things you can
do and you can always use the humor
there is also one big thing about the
humour it really hurts
because these guys really are taking
themselves too seriously when you start
to mock them it hurts now everybody is
talking about His Majesty the Internet
and it is also very useful skill and but
don't rush to label things like Facebook
revolution Twitter revolution don't mix
tools with a substance it is true that
internet and new media are very useful
in making things faster and cheaper they
make it also a bit safer for the
participants because they give the part
of anonymity we are watching the great
example of something else internet can
do
oh it can put the price tag of
state-sponsored violence over non
violent protester
this is famous group we are all colored
side made by Wael Ghonim in Egypt and
his friend this is the mutilated face of
the guy who was beaten by the police
this is how he became the public and
this is what probably became the straw
which broke camel's back but here is
also the bad news the nonviolent
struggle is when in a real world in the
streets you will never change
your society towards democracy or you
know economics if you sit down and click
there are risks to be taken and there
are living people who are winning this
struggle well million-dollar question
what will happen in the Arab world and
though young people from Arab world were
pretty successful in bringing down three
dictators shaking the region kind of
persuading clever kings from Jordan and
Morocco doing substantial reforms it is
yet to be seen what will be the outcome
whether the Egyptians and Tunisians will
make it through the transition or this
will end in bloody ethnic and religious
conflicts whether the Syrians will
maintain on violent discipline faced
with a brutal daily violence which kills
thousands already or they will slip in a
violent struggle and make ugly civil war
will these revolutions be whole like
through the transitions and democracy or
be overtaken by military or extremists
of all kind we cannot tell same works
for the western sector where you can see
all these excited young people
protesting around the world occupying
this occupying that are they going to
become the world wave are they're going
to find their skills their enthusiasm
and their strategy to find what they
really want and push for the reform or
they will just stay complaining about
the endless list of the things they hate
this is the difference between to town
now what the statistics has my friends
book Maria Stefan's book talks a lot
about the violent and nonviolent
struggle and there are some shocking
data if
look at the last 35 years and different
social transitions from dictatorship to
democracy you will see that out of 67
different cases in 50 of these cases it
was nonviolent struggle which was the
key power this is one more reason to
look at this phenomenon this is one more
reason to look at the generation epsilon
enough for me to give them credits and
hope that they will find their skills
and their courage to use the nonviolent
struggle and thus fix at least a part of
the mess our generation is making in
this world thank you
you